We're talking in St.
Louis with Mr. Carl A. Peterson, P-E-T-E-R-S-E-N, is that right?
P-E-T-E-R-S-E-N.
If you misspelled my name, I'll claim that I never said any of these things.
I'm sure Bob told you.
I intend to hire a fact checker, by the way.
Let me ask you about your name.
It's Greek.
It has an unfamiliar rhythm to it.
And I decided it has to be either Albanian or something.
Albanian is close.
It has to be from that area.
Well, it's Greek.
It is Greek.
From that part of Greece, which is very close to Albania.
But you would say Bosbanese.
There's really no B in Greek, it's actually a B, so Basbainish, but it's been anglicized to Basbainish.
Is that S at the end?
Is that like an SH?
Is it Basbainish?
No, no, it's Basbainish.
It's B.
You told me that you started collecting in about 1948, I guess.
I was collecting in 1948, and after the collection was enough important that people would ask me, and as I say, I'm not sure whether they're being flighted or whether they're being curious, why did you collect four things?
For a long time, I gave a stupid answer, and then I realized that if somebody asked me that, I would say, did you ever collect anything?
And if they didn't even collect anything, there was no way I could answer their question.
But if they said, well, I collected stamps when I was a kid, or I collected coins, or I collected wall sconces, or whatever, then I could answer their question, because then I could say, well, you have to have that strange, kind of orderly inquisitiveness
As part of your personality, before you can understand why somebody would collect something specific, did you always have that?
Yeah, I collected stamps when I was in school.
Somewhere along the line in high school, I discovered Santa Clara Lewis.
And that's when I was going to collect books.
I was going to collect Santa Clara Lewis.
You were a kid in high school.
Yeah, and I didn't have any money, obviously.
So that kind of went by the wayside.
Of course, in those days, there were finally second-hand bookstores, many, many more than there are now.
Can you just, let me interrupt a little bit?
Can you give biographical facts, where you're from, and where we're talking about when you're talking about high school?
Well, I was born and went to grade school, and went to high school, and went to college on the south side of Chicago.
Okay, so you went into Chicago.
And the college was Illinois Institute of Technology, and there
there's chemical engineering and of course there are not too many electives available because there's such a full
a menu of mathematics, chemistry, physics, and so forth.
But when it came time for lectures, I enjoyed literature.
I enjoyed reading.
And I took the course in contemporary American literature.
Contemporary American literature in 1948.
was, of course, T.S.
Eliot, who hasn't been born in some minutes, although that's nothing to do now.
I mean, this is still back after Chicago.
and then all of the people that gathered for us, and that was the poetry part.
Well, there were a weird time.
There were certainly contemporaries everywhere.
And then the short stories of everyone from Dorothy Parker to James III.
But there were four novels in the course.
Four novels were The Sun Also Rises,
Look Homeward Angel.
What is the Dos Passos?
America.
USA.
And all three of those writers I'd heard of.
I'd heard of Thomas Wolfe because somebody began to hear about Thomas Wolfe.
And of course, anyway, and Dos Passos I had somehow
there was a book called i lay dying i never heard of one and so i read that book and first thing was how can somebody write about these people that i'm a city boy this is about country people
How could somebody write about these people in such a way that I am so fascinated?
And then, what is it about this writer that makes this all so good?
It's so exciting.
So then, of course, the professor, who was a man named Howard Vincent.
Howard Vincent had written a book called The Trying Out of Moby Dick.
Howard Vincent was an elder specialist.
And he talked about other books by Faulkner.
In 1948, most of them were out of print, although there were some paperbacks coming out.
After all, as I lay down, I was in that modern library, pairing with the Song of the Fury.
That was about the same period that the paperbacks were coming out, Sanctuary, Wild Pops.
he was kind of at his still kind of at his nadir at that point oh yes yes uh he was until uh the nobel
So anyway, I wanted to read more of those books.
So I went to some of those bookstores that, as I said, used to be around Chicago, where they would have first editions.
And I bought, I bought light lines for $10.
Jesus, you know, and I paid for mine.
And I don't even have the dropped letter on that, you know.
So I bought light lines for $10.
You have a jacket?
Oh, yeah.
How old were you in 48?
uh nineteen nineteen and this was your first acquisition yeah that's the first collector's uh level uh when i sold my collection master i did not dispose of that well that joint modern library well that's kind of your readings does it have more
Yeah, it's just a book.
It's the first book.
Then jumping ahead, I buy the books as I can find them.
In 1950, I got out of school.
Pardon me, at the age of 19, you were an undergraduate or you were out of high school?
Yeah, this was chemical engineering.
I bet you were a freshman or so probably late.
They started collecting when you were in college, so that's very interesting to me.
Oh, yes.
I started acquiring when I was in college.
That's a technical thing.
What's the difference between an acquisition and a collection, or an accumulation?
Well, it was just a verb that I used.
I don't forget to do that.
I graduated to get my bachelor's degree in June of 1950, and two weeks after the Korean War started.
So I... You're a young lad now of 21, apparently.
Right.
You want to do this again, please?
Yeah.
And the thing is that...
When I got out of school, there was a recession.
And then two weeks later, there was the Korean War, and then I was draft bait, and there was an economy starting to thrive.
But it was about two months before I got a job.
Well, then I worked for six months before I was drafted.
So I was drafted in the early part of 1951.
Okay, so at this point you've been collecting for three years and you went off in the service.
Yeah, but in a very... Did you take your books off to the service with you?
No, I wrapped them up.
There weren't that many.
Well, there were enough.
There weren't that many, but I wrapped them up.
And then, uh, when I was stationed in Philadelphia, it was a year and a half stationed, uh, I walked things at, uh, I don't know what I want, but I, in Sessler, in Philadelphia.
I don't know what I want.
Was there a Louder Milks down there, no?
Pardon?
Wasn't there a Louder Milks?
No, Louder Milks is in Washington.
They're in Washington.
Louder Milks is in Washington.
And I never, uh, never, uh,
I don't know anything there.
But I did visit about them, yeah.
But Goodspeed's up in Boston.
And then?
You went to Goodspeed's?
Oh, yeah.
I think I bought As I Lay Dying Goodspeed's.
You'd be disheartened to see...
how mediocre his selection of books has become.
He's really an art and print deal, I know.
Well, I wonder how many people were collecting modern firsts in the 1940s and early 50s.
Not too many.
I mean, not compared to today.
It's kind of a recent phenomenon.
The reflection is that the dealers... Yeah, well, I think it's also the availability and the unavailability of things, too.
Anyway, in June of 1952, I went to New York and I had seen the ads for House of Books Lemonade.
and i went to uh awesome books limited and the captain was still alive in those days who he was still alive and i remember i can find the records what i bought i think i bought uh sound and the fury for 22.50 and
These are $2,000, $3,000 books they have.
And then when I bought those, Martin says to me, okay, now you're not a cataloghound anymore.
You're another what?
A cataloghound.
Because I had, I had, I don't know, while I was in Philadelphia, maybe even before I either went into the area, I had written a house of books.
Please send me your catalog, please send me your free catalog or whatever.
And I worked for it.
Over the years, Margie became married.
I'm sorry that she didn't look the right way.
I'd love to have interviewed her.
Did you know her at all?
No, I mean, I've missed it.
I understand that she looked the wrong way in the street in London, is that right?
Yeah, apparently.
Yeah, that was 1984?
Yeah, whatever.
She was a marvelous friend.
I know she would talk.
about her.
She put a, my young collectors, I'm so lucky I have my young collectors, especially after Louis.
Louis died in 1953.
And, uh, Marty was always kind of the shy member of the organization.
And after Louis died, she just went with it.
I'd love to talk to you about it.
I bet she would have had a million really worthwhile
I wonder if she's done an oral history anywhere right now.
I've been finding oral histories by the way.
Well, let me put it this way.
In 1978 or 79, I rented tape recorders and we had some conversations.
You have some conversations with her on tape?
Yeah.
You're kidding.
at least anything that you're willing to uh i'd be willing to play for you i don't know let's let's do that after a while yeah
She had talked about it.
She had talked about doing something like that.
This should really be an oral history, you know.
She had talked about it to her, and I said, well, let's do it, and so forth.
And then...
She was always reluctant to write anything down.
She was always reluctant to have anybody take her seriously about the story she told.
Because she would tell these stories over and over again.
She would tell the story of how Louie became a book collector.
I forget who it was.
Louie was Margie's husband.
Louis Henry was in the French fashion, she called him Louie.
And he had, he read Louie and it seemed that he
When the new books would come out, he would buy them.
And he saw the latest, you know, title, someplace for a certain price.
And then he visited the Drakes.
And he mentioned this title.
And they said, well, we have that title.
And they mentioned it for us.
And they said, well, that's a different price from the owner.
And they said, well,
you're talking about the american edition we're talking about the english edition which is the first edition and she said that's how louis became a book collector because he learned that there was a difference between the two now louis did uh this is uh in the late 20s
Louis did a bibliography which is still the early... Well, Hanneman was just kind of... Right.
But Hanneman, by the way, spent a lot of time with my... Louis's bibliography was done by 1930, which is very early.
think i mean the guys the corpus is hardly put together let's see 1930 really right the guy's probably been a writer for uh six or seven years
I agree, but we did this, and in the process of doing it, he got to know him.
He got to know him.
Don't forget, Parallel to Arms is 1929.
1929, I haven't.
You see, I think 1929 is a spectacular year.
1929, Parallel to Arms, Look Homeward, Angel, and The Song and the Period.
And the Pulitzer Prize, I'm not sure now whether it went to Julia Peterkin's Scarlet Sister Mary, or whether it went to an Indian novel.
There was a writer who used to write about the American Indians.
It's a long-forgotten, probably.
I've studied years, by the way.
Twenty-nine is when I... Sixty-one, for instance, is a wonderful year.
John F. X. Rabbit Run.
Walker Percy's The Movie Goer, which I love.
Walker Percy, I love.
I just better get to write Walker Percy.
John Steinbeck's Winter of Our Discontent.
Of course, he's not American, but Malcolm will always enter the volcano.
Very interesting year, 61.
Did you get the bullets in that year?
How about... I mean, some total... Is Catch-22 61?
Catch-22 is 61.
Catch-22...
That's right, exactly right.
Catch-22 lost out.
The National Book Award went to Walker Percy.
Nobody had a book in the remainder.
I think the first printing of that was like 1500.
Very, very, very interesting.
It's funny how creative talent seems to
Malcolm Cowley, who did The Portable Faulkner, right, has written about years, two years, and I'll have to go back, 29.
I mean, I didn't realize that all those books were that year.
It's fascinating.
Let's talk about you, and we'll talk about Margie a little later, because I really am interested in you, about your fascination.
Again, you're a chemist, a chemical engineer, and are all these things compatible?
Oh, yeah, I think if I learn nothing else... Chemists and engineers are very precise, though, and very mechanical.
Well, if I learn nothing else, it's that all kinds of prejudices have foolish backgrounds.
That's a good point.
Well, you know, he does this, therefore he can't do that, or something else.
Or as you guys know, and certainly as book dealers know,
Fantastic collections in towns.
How can there be a collection in Kansas City or how can there be a collection in Denver?
That's why I'm here, you know, in St.
Louis.
And that's right.
And here in San Luis, you have two people who have obviously a rabid fascination with Walker.
Amazing, isn't it?
And you know, two people in one town.
It's spectacular.
I did tell him, by the way, I reached him this morning.
I did mention that I'll see you tomorrow.
He did say that it is Carl Peterson who made me a collector.
I read your book in 1975.
And he said, wow, if he can do this, then I can do it.
So he said, I don't know whether that's a tip of the hat or what, but he did say that.
When I wrote that book or some of that book or whatever, one of the things I had in there was the copy of Soldiers' Pay that had belonged to Shirley Adams.
and sherwood anderson had helped get that one focus and uh when aldi saw that he was he was very nice let me say for the benefit of my type is ld l period d period
He was buying from the Margie and he went to Margie and he said... Went to whom, I'm sorry?
To Margie and he says, how does Carl get such a book?
And she says, well, Carl knows Mrs. Anderson.
And from that, I think he was emulated to realize that dealing with book dealers was not the way to get the really juicy items.
The way to get the juicy items is to find the people who were talking.
And to Eldon's credit, he did.
He went to people that knew Faulkner.
He had little kids together.
He went to members of the family.
He really went after those things.
Is this a philosophical thing?
I mean, what's wrong with going to dealers?
Pardon?
What's wrong with getting your books from dealers?
Oh, no, no, no, no.
No, no, I'm just curious because I think there is.
There's nothing wrong.
If you go to a WhatsApp, how do dealers get their books?
Somebody sells them, or they seek it out.
But do dealers go to Paul Holmes' job?
Or do dealers go to John Williams, who was Paul Holmes' mistress in the late 40s and 50s?
Do dealers go to Mehta, who was his lover out there?
They don't.
They don't know about it.
And so...
someone like L.D.
and myself to a lesser extent will seek out these people
and see if we can work out have you done this yourself uh to a lesser extent but you know i've had some success it is very interesting yeah we're going to get to that later because i think that this is uh i have to tell you you're the first major collector i've interviewed who has in fact
dissolved his collection.
And we have to talk about that at some point.
Well, I talked a little bit.
I wanted to talk to Arthur Houghton when he left me.
After a conversation, I started talking about it a little bit today, and I thought a new insight.
In the 40s and the 50s,
This collection served a very useful purpose.
It was stimulating to me and it gave me a way to, for instance, when I was in the Army and afterwards, it gave me another area to concentrate on besides the means by which I get my education, I get through the Army, I make my living.
It was very useful in that way.
And now I'm getting close to retirement and this collection is serving a very useful purpose.
Because now, with having had a great deal of pleasure from it, I have turned it into money, which is what I need for retirement.
It would be great to have a happy retirement and still possess the collection.
But I don't have the needs for that.
So now the collection has been sold, and I'm not going to get all philosophical about somebody else enjoying it.
I don't care whether they enjoy it or not.
At both ends of the lifespan, it has served a purpose.
And I think it's great.
And in between, I've met a lot of people that I enjoy going and providing.
The sad thing is, so many of them are dead now.
Carvel Collins, Carvel Collins was the Faulkner Scholar.
There was really no one in the same class.
And he died a few miles ago.
And there were people that I met along the way.
I met people in New Orleans years ago.
I talked to one man who had been one of the editors of The Double Dealer down there, and talked to him on the phone in New Orleans.
And he said he hadn't been feeling well.
And six weeks later, he died.
And he didn't know it.
I don't think I'm consciously collecting people, but nevertheless, I thought, well, I'd rather get to talk to him before he died.
Tell me what the collection meant to you while you had it, though.
Can you put that into words?
Can you express that?
Oh, yeah.
And it spanned.
I think the collection, if you sold it, so we're talking about 40,
40-plus years, right, that you enjoyed this?
Okay, so I bought, I bought, tried to fill in the books, and Margie used to reassure me, don't worry, someday you'll have a marble farm, someday you'll have a... What eluded you, by the way?
Did anything elude you?
Those books did not come easily.
Marble farm and... You got a marble farm?
I ended up with two.
Really?
Any association copies?
Yeah, one was one of those copies that he signed the first day he had them.
To whom?
To a lady named Sunshine Lawless, who was a lady that lived down in Mississippi.
Right.
she's not in blotner's biography she wasn't sunshine l-a-w-l-a-s-s l-a-w-l-e-s-s lawless just the right time a white woman or a black woman oh no a white woman the sunshine could be taken as a very curious well that christian name that was a big name don't forget in the south uh names are different you know every woman is named elizabeth sue or
I mean, she has two first names.
Billy Joe.
Billy Joe, yeah.
So, um, uh, no, I, uh, but Margie was saying, eventually, you'll have a vote on Moses, a limited vote on Moses.
Eventually, you'll have... See if you're assuring you.
Yeah, but...
I was in the shop in 1956.
I remember 1956.
I remember it was the time of the Hungarian Revolt and all the other things that were happening.
And I says, what can I buy?
And she says, well, do you want to start buying some of the French editions?
I said, I might as well.
I can't buy any of those.
And that's when I started buying foreign editions in 1956.
The French edition says limited edition.
And then gradually, oh God, you know, all that foreign stuff.
It was fun.
Were you obsessed though?
Well, it was a way to keep adding to the collection.
What were you thinking?
What did you see?
Maybe it was like eating too much chocolate.
You know, you feel good while you're doing it.
And I had to add things to the collection.
How did you enjoy it?
how did that yeah well i mean did you did you read the foreign editions for instance or was that just the pleasure of ownership no the joy of ownership even to the point where uh and don't forget all through all this i find the critical stuff yeah the b items i'm buying the yale review and the virginia quarterly review and i'm buying
These books that are coming out, that are studies.
Did you sell it as a collection or did you sign it?
I tried to sell it to a...
I had a dealer who tried to sell it to an institutional collection, a library, a university library.
Generically I'm speaking now.
They dealt with one or two specific ones.
It was fascinating.
Everybody was quite contented.
I would donate it for me.
And L.D.
has pulled the best of all possible worlds deal.
I don't know if you know about it.
Well, we're going down there tomorrow.
Yeah, yeah.
But I mean, he's sold it to get cash.
He's donated quite enough to get tax relief.
And he's the archivist on it, the curator.
So he will get an annual...
But anyway, when I was trying to sell it, the Library of Congress would have been very happy to have it donated.
Well, you can't afford to do that.
I can't.